We're going to do is we're going to consider a piece of copper.
Copper is a very good conductor.
It has 29 each.
Each copper atom has 29 protons and each copper atom has 29 electrons so it's electrically neutral.
Now when you take a piece of copper wire here I've drawn kind of these copper atoms everywhere.
Now what happens here if you look at the electronic structure of copper the shell is kind of full and
you have this one electron here out here that's kind of further away from the nucleus and it's really
this electron here that takes part in the conduction the further away from the positive nucleus.
Therefore it feels the least amount of attractive force to the nucleus and is basically free to move
in the copper.
OK.
Now this picture here at the top basically shows you what would happen if I connect a piece of copper
wire to a battery.
So this here is the electric field imagine the battery produces an electric field that's pointing from
the right side to the left side.
So that means we saw in the previous picture there should be a force acting on these electrons and there
should be an electron or an acceleration rather acting or an acceleration of these electrons given by
this expression which would mean that the velocity if it starts from wrasse should be given by a Times
some amount of time that should be what the velocity is in the bigger time as well.
The bigger the velocity is.
However that's not really what happens because these electrons out here these electrons well they're
not in free space anymore.
What happens to them is they end up colliding with these positive ions and they can also collide with
other electrons going on.
There's a lot of things that can happen with these electrons so although there is an electric field
pointing from the right side to the left side the motion of an electron even when there is an electric
field present is not really like this it accelerates for a little bit but then it bounces off and goes
in a different direction it accelerates a little bit then it bounces off and goes in a different direction.
So overall I mean the motion can kind of be kind of very complicated but there is kind of a net flow
going from in this case from the left side you know toward this side but the motion is not just the
nice smooth flow going.
If I look at each individual electron the motion can be actually quite complicated and if you would
turn off that electric field if I unplug the battery Well what would it look like.
If you look at your wire again these wires are at room temperature and you look at each individual electron
in that case what would happen is again it would still move just due to thermal fluctuation.
However if you examine just one particular cross-section the number of electrons that would cross in
one direction would be the same number of electrons that would cross in the other direction.
So if the electric field is zero Chargers are still moving due to thermal fluctuations.
But there is no net drift of these electrons so the drift velocity should go to zero on that limit which
means that the current should go to zero if there is no electric field.
So if you look at kind of the velocity of these electrons just due to thermal fluctuations you know
in copper you're looking at numbers that are approximately 10 to the six meters per second.
That's a really really fast.
Now due to all of these collisions what happens that drift velocity just this net kind of constant velocity
of these electrons kind of flowing down this drift velocity is to the order of.
Let me just write it like this one millimeter per second.
All right.
This is one times tend to the negative 3 meters per second.
It's orders of magnitude slower than the velocity of these electrons only because of all these collisions
and everything else going on.
And that's even in the best conductors can make this number a little bit bigger by increasing the magnitude
of the electric field.
We'll see this connection in just a minute.
But this is just to give you kind of an idea of the orders of magnitude at play.